## Chapter IV.

# Antiquarian Researches And Ministry 

### 1843-6 

Another thing which raised my name in and beyond the county was the ‘Lost Church’ at Perranzabuloe. There was an old British church existing  in some sand-hills in the parish, and it was said to be entire as far as the  four walls. The hill under which it was buried was easily known by the  bones and teeth which covered it. The legend said that the patron saint,  St. Piran, was buried under the altar, and that close by the little church  was a cell in which he lived and died. This was enough. I got men, and  set to work to dig it up. After some days’ labour we came to the floor,  where we discovered the stone seats, and on the plaster of the wall the  greasy marks of the heads and shoulders of persons who had sat there  many centuries ago. We found the chancel step, and also the altar tomb  (which was built east and west, not north and south). It was fallen, but  enough remained to show the original shape and height of it. 

I put a notice in the newspapers, inviting people to come and see the old church which had been buried for fifteen hundred years! In the presence  of many visitors, clerical and lay, we removed the stones of the altar, and  found the skeleton of St. Piran, which was identified in three ways. The  legend said that he was a man seven feet high the skeleton measured six  feet from the shoulderbones to the heel. Again another legend said that  his head was enshrined in a church forty miles away the skeleton  corresponded with this, for it was headless. Moreover, it was said that his  mother and a friend were buried on either side of him we also found  skeletons of a male and female in these positions. Being satisfied on this  point, we set the masons to work to rebuild the altar tomb in its original  shape and size, using the same stones as far as they would go. We made  up the deficiency with a heavy granite slab.

In this I traced with my finger, in rude Roman letters, ‘SANCTUS PIRANUS.’ The mason would not cut those crooked letters unless I consented for him  to put his name in better ones in the corner. I could not agree to this, so  his apprentice and I, between us, picked out the rude letters, which have  since (I have heard) been copied for a veritable Roman inscription.  My name was now up as an antiquary. and I was asked to be the  secretary (for the West of Engl and) to the Archaeological Society. I was  supposed to be an old gentleman, and heard myself quoted as the  ‘venerable and respected Haslam’, whose word was considered enough  to settle a knotty point beyond doubt. I was invited to give a lecture on  the old Perran Church, at the Royal Institution, Truro, which I did  illustrating it with sketches of the building, and exhibiting some rude  remains of carving, which are now preserved in the museum there.  The audience requested me (through their chairman) to print my lecture.  This I undertook also but being very young in literary enterprises, I  added a great deal of other matter to the manuscript which I was  preparing for the press. There was much in the book about early  Christianity and ecclesiastical antiquities. I imagined that this parish was,  in British and Druidic times, a populous place, and somewhat important.  There was a ‘Round’, or amphitheatre, for public games, and four British  castles also a great many sepulchral mounds on the hills, the burial place  of chieftains. I supposed that St. Piran came here among these rude  natives (perhaps painted savages) to preach the Gospel, and then built  himself a cell by the sea-shore, near a spring or well, where he baptized  his converts. Close by, he built this little church, in which he worshipped  God and prayed for the people.

The words of the poet Spenser do not inaptly describe this scene of other days- 

>‘A little, lowly hermitage it was, <BR> 
Downe in a dale - <BR>
Far from resort of people, that did pas <BR>
In traveill to and fro a litle wyde <BR>
There was a holy chappell edifyde, <BR>
Wherein the hermite dewly wont to say <BR>
His holy things each morn and eventyde <BR>
Thereby a crystall streame did gently play, <BR>
Which from a sacred fountaine wellèd forth away.’ 

Here then, more than fourteen centuries ago, people called upon God and when their little sanctuary was overwhelmed with the sand, they  removed to the other side of the river, and built themselves another  church but they still continued to bury their dead around and above the  oratory and resting-place of St. Piran. 

When my book was published, there ensued a hot controversy about the subject of it and some who came to see the ‘Lost Church’ for themselves,  declared that it was nothing more than ‘a modern cow-shed’ others  would not believe in the antiquity I claimed for it one of these even  ventured to assert his opinion in print that ‘it was at least eight centuries  later than the date I had fixed’ another asked, in a newspaper letter, ‘How  is it, if this is a church, that there are no others of the same period on  record?’ 

This roused me to make further research and I was soon rewarded by finding in the registry at Exeter a list of ninety-two churches existing in  Cornwall alone in the time of Edward the Confessor, of which Lam-piran  was one. 

With the help of another antiquary, I discovered nine in one week, in the west part of the county, with foundation walls and altar tombs, of  which I published an account in the ‘Archaeological Journal’. This  paper set other persons to work, who discovered similar remains in  various parts of the country and thus it was proved to demonstration  that we had more ecclesiastical antiquities, and of earlier date, than we  were aware of. 

Next, my attention was directed to Cornish crosses about which I also sent a paper, with illustrations, as a good secretary and correspondent  to the same Journal. My researches on this subject took me back to a  very remote time. I found crosses among Roman remains, with  inscriptions, something like those in the Catacombs near Rome - these  were evidently Christian but I found crosses also among Druidic  antiquities. I could not help inquiring, ‘Where did the Druids get this  sign? From the Phoenicians. ‘Where did they get it?’ From the  Egyptians. ‘Where did they get it?’ Then I discovered that the cross  had come to Egypt with traditions about a garden, a woman, a child,  and a serpent, and, that the cross was always represented in the hand  of the second person of their trinity of gods. This personage had a  human mother, and slew the serpent which had persecuted her. (These  traditions came to the Egyptians from an ancestor who had come over  the flood with seven others.) 

Here was a wonderful discovery! The mythology of Egypt was based on original tradition, handed down from Antediluvian times! From  further investigation, it was evident that the substance of Hindoo  mythology came from the same source as also that of the Greeks,  Chinese, Mexicans, and Scandinavians. This is how the Druids got the  cross also it was in the hand of their demi-god Thor, the second person  of their triad, who slew the great serpent with his famous hammer,  which he bequeathed to his followers. 

I was beside myself with excitement, and walked about the room in a most agitated state. I then made a table or harmony of these various  mythologies, and when placed side by side, it was quite clear that they  were just one and the same story, though dressed up in a variety of  mythological forms, and that the story was none other than that of the  Bible. 

In my architectural journeys I used to entertain people with these wondrous subjects and one evening I had the honour of agitating even  the Bishop of Exeter himself, who, in his enthusiasm, bade me write a  book, and dedicate it to him. I did so. ‘The Cross and the Serpent’ is the  title of it, and it was duly inscribed to his lordship.  It excites me even now to think about it, though it is thirty-five years  since I made these discoveries. The old librarian at Oxford declared  that I was mad, and yet he could not keep away from the subject, and  was never weary of hearing something more about it. This reverend  Doctor said, ‘If you are right, then all the great antiquaries are wrong.’  I suggested that they had not had the advantage I possessed of placing  their various theories side by side, or of making their observations  from my point of view. 

Notwithstanding all these external labours which engrossed my earnest and deep attention, I did not neglect my parish. I felt, however, that my parishioners did not know anything about ecclesiastical  antiquities or architectural science and that they knew nothing, and  cared less, about Church teaching. They did not believe, with me, that  in order to be saved hereafter, they ought to be in the Church, and  receive the Holy Communion - that there is no salvation out of the  Church, and no Church without a Bishop. They were utterly careless  about these things, and from the first had been an unsympathetic and  unteachable people. I feel sure that had it not been for other interesting  occupations which engaged my mind, I should have been altogether  discouraged with them. 

I tried to stir them up to a zeal worthy of their ancestors, who were such good and loyal Churchmen, that King Charles the First wrote  them a letter of commendation, and commanded that it should be put  up in all the churches. I had a copy of this letter well painted, framed,  and placed in a conspicuous part of my church. Then I prepared an  original sermon, which I preached, or rather read, to inaugurate the  royal letter. 

My text was taken from Heb. xii. 22-24. ‘Ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an  innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of  the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all,  and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator  of the new covenant and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh  better things than that of Abel.’ I applied these words to the Church of  England, and rather reproached the Cornish people for not being more  loyal and scriptural! 

I think I was more roused by my sermon than any one else and no one asked me to print it, but I did for all that, with a copy of the king’s  letter. I am sorry to say that the public did not care sufficiently about it  to buy copies enough even to pay for printing. 

It fell very flat, but I attributed that to the degeneracy of the times, and of Cornish people in particular. The fact was, they understood that text  far better than I did, and knew that ‘the Church of the first-born’ was  something more spiritual than I had any conception of. 

From the commencement of my ministry I did not as a general rule, preach my own sermons, but Newman’s, which I abridged and  simplified, for in that day I thought them most sound in doctrine,  practical, and full of good common sense. Indeed, as far as Church  teaching went, they were, to my mind, perfect. They stated doctrines  and drew manifest conclusions but my people were not satisfied with  them then and I can see now, thank God! that, with all their  excellences, they were utterly deficient in spiritual vitality.  Their author was one whom I personally admired very much, but by  his own showing, in his ‘Apologia’, he was a man who was searching  not for God, but for a Church. At length, when he grasped the ideal of  what a Church ought to be, he tried by the Oxford Tracts, especially  No. XC., to raise the Church of England to his standard and failing in  that, he became dissatisfied, and went over to the Church of Rome.  Once, when I arrived at a friend’s house in the Lake district, I was told  that there was a most beautiful view of distant mountains to be seen  from my window. In the morning I lifted the blind to look, but only  saw an ordinary view of green fields, hedges, trees, and a lake. There  was nothing else whatever to be seen. In the course of the day, a heavy  mist which had been hanging over the lake was dispersed, and then I  saw the beautiful mountains which before had been so completely  veiled that it was difficult to believe in their existence.  So it was with me. I could see ecclesiastical things, but the more  glorious view of spiritual realities beyond them, in all their full and  vast expanse, was as yet hidden. 

Whether my extracts from Newman’s Sermons were more pointed, or whether I became more impatient with my congregation, I cannot tell,  but it was very evident that my words were beginning to take effect at  last for as I went on preaching and protesting against the people and  against schism, my ‘bass viol’ called on me one day and said, ‘If you go  on preaching that doctrine, you will drive away the best part of your  congregation.’ ‘Excuse me,’ I answered, ‘not the best part you mean the  worst part.’ ‘Well,’ he said, ‘you will see.’ 

On the following Sunday, I gave out my text, and had scarcely read three pages of my manuscript when I heard a voice say, ‘Now we will  go.’ With this, the ‘bass viol,’ the other fiddles, the clarionet, the  ophicleide and the choir, came stumping down the gallery stairs, and  marched out. Some of the congregation followed their example, with  the determination never to come back to the Church again. I waited till  the noise was over, and then went on with my sermon meekly, and  thought myself a martyr for Church principles. 

I little thought that the people were being martyred yet they were right, and enlightened in the truth, while I was altogether in the dark,  and knew nothing about it. From this time there was a constant feud  between the parishioners and myself. I thought that they were  schismatics and they knew that I was unconverted, and did not preach  the Gospel. 

One day, a Dissenter called to pay a burial fee for the funeral of his child, which he had purposely omitted paying at the proper time  because he wished to tell me a piece of his mind. I was absent on the  occasion on some architectural or archaeological business, which was  to me all important. ‘I know,’ he said, ‘why you went away and would  not bury my child.’ ‘Do you?’ I asked. ‘Yes it was because I am a  Dissenter.’ ‘Oh!’ I said, ‘I would bury you all tomorrow if I could for  you are no good, and can do none either.’ 

This went round the parish like wildfire, and did not advance my popularity, or do my cause any good. 

Seriously at this time I thought that separation from the Church of England was a most deadly sin - it was schism. Idolatry and murder  were sins against the Mosaic law but, this was a sin against the  Church. I little dreamt then that many of the people with whom I thus  contended, and whom I grieved so much, were real spiritual members  of Christ, and had only ceased to be members of the Church of  England because I did not preach the Gospel that, in fact, I was the  cause of their leaving the services that I was the schismatic, for I was  separated from Christ they only, and that for a good reason, had  separated from the communion of the Church of England, which I  misrepresented. 

The Church of England’s teaching since the Reformation, like that of the primitive Church, is based not on baptism, but CONVERSION.  Baptism was intended according to the Lord’s commandment (Matt.  xxviii. 19), for the purpose of making disciples (see Greek) - that is, to  graft members Into the body of Christ’s Church outwardly. Whatever  special grace is given to infants and others at baptism, is given upon  the condition of personal faith and repentance. Until a baptized person  has been enabled by the Holy Ghost to repent and believe the Gospel,  he is not really a new-born child of God, or raised from death unto life,  though nominally, in the words of the Catechism, he has ‘been made a  child of God’. 

Since the feuds and dissensions in my parish, the church was almost deserted, and left chiefly to myself, my clerk, and a few poor people,  who, for the most part, were in ill favour in the chapels.  One day I was absorbed in writing, or rather re-writing, a text over the  porch door of the church. It was, ‘This is none other but the house of  God, and this is the gate of heaven.’ A man who was standing at the  foot of the ladder said, ‘Heaven is a long way from that gate, I reckon.’  I pretended not to hear him, but his speech stuck to me. I knew only  too well from this, and many other indications, that the people had no  respect for the church under my ministrations. 
