## Chapter VI. 

# The Awakening

### 1848-51 

The more earnestly I wrought among the people, and the better I knew them, the more I saw that the mere attachment to the Church, and  punctual attendance at the services or frequency of Communion, was  not sufficient. I wanted something deeper. I wanted to reach their  hearts in order to do them good.

Whether this desire sprang up in the ordinary progress by which God was imperceptibly leading me, or from a story I heard at a clerical  meeting, I know not - perhaps from both. My mind was evidently as  ground prepared to receive the warning. The story was about a dream  a clergyman had. He thought the Judgment-day was come, and that  there was, as it were, a great visitation - greater than the Bishop’s. The  clergy were mustering, and appeared in their gowns, but instead of  being alone, they had part of their congregations with them. Some had  a few followers, others had more, and some a great many and all these  received a gracious smile from the Judge when their names were  called. The clergyman who dreamed was waiting, as he supposed,  with a large number of people at his back. When his turn came he went  forward but, as he approached, he saw that the Judge’s countenance  was sad and dark. In a sudden impulse of suspicion he looked back  and lo! there was no one behind him. He stopped, not daring to go any  further, and turning to look at the Judge, saw that His countenance  was full of wrath. This dream had such an effect upon him that he  began to attend to his parish and care for the souls of his people  I also was beginning to see that I ought to care for the souls of my  people - at least, as much as I did for the services of the Church. As a  priest, I had the power (so I thought) to give them absolution and yet  none, alas! availed themselves of the opportunity. How could they  have forgiveness if they did not come to me? This absolution I believed  to be needful before coming to Holy Communion, and that it was,  indeed, the true preparation for that sacred ordinance. I used to speak  privately to the members of the Church Guild about this, and  persuaded some of them to come to me for confession and absolution  but I was restless, and felt that I was doing good by stealth. Besides  this, those whom I thus absolved were not satisfied, for they said they  could not rejoice in the forgiveness of their sins as the Methodists did,  or say that they were pardoned. In this respect I was working upon  most tender ground, but I did not know what else to do. 

I used to spend hours and hours in my church alone in meditation and prayer and, while thinking, employed my hands in writing texts over  the windows and on the walls, and in painting ornamental borders  above the arches. I remember writing over the chancel arch, with much  interest and exultation, ‘Now is come salvation, and strength, and the  kingdom of our God, and the power of His Christ’ (Rev. xii. 10).  I imagined, in my sanguine hope, that the kingdom of Christ was  come, and that the ‘accuser of the brethren’ was cast down. I thought I  saw, in the power of Christ given to His priests, such victory that  nothing could stand against it. So much for dwelling on a theory, right  or wrong, till it fills the mind. Yet I cannot say that all this was without  prayer. I did wait upon God, and thought my answers were from Him  but I see now that I went to the Lord with an idol in my heart, and that  He answered me according to it (Ezek. xiv. 3). 

One day I saw a picture in a friend’s house which attracted me during the time I was waiting for him. It was nothing artistic, nor was it over  well drawn, but still it engaged my attention in a way for which I  could not account. When my friend came down, we talked about other  things but even after I left the house this picture haunted me. At night  I lay awake thinking about it - so much so, that I rose early the next  morning, and went to a bookseller’s shop, where I bought a large sheet  of tracing-paper and pencil, and sent them out by the postman, with a  note to my friend, begging him to give me a tracing of the picture in  question. 

I had to wait for more than a fortnight before it arrived, and then how great was my joy! I remember spreading a white cloth on my table, and  opening out the tracing-paper upon it and there was the veritable  picture of the Good Shepherd! His countenance was loving and kind.  With one hand He was pushing aside the branch of a tree, though a  great thorn went right through it and with the other He was extricating  a sheep which was entangled in the thorns. The poor thing was  looking up in helplessness, all spotted over with marks of its own  blood, for it was wounded in struggling to escape. Another thing  which struck me in this picture was that the tree was growing on the  edge of a precipice, and had it not been for it (the tree) with all the  cruel wounds it inflicted, the sheep would have gone over and  perished. 

After considering this picture for a long time, I painted it in a larger size on the wall of my church, just opposite the entrance door, so that  every one who came in might see it. I cannot describe the interest with  which I employed myself about this work and when it was done,  finding that it wanted a good bold foreground, I selected a short text -  ‘He came to seek and to save that which was lost.’ 

God was speaking to me all this time about the Good Shepherd who gave His life for me but I did not hear Him, or suspect that I was lost,  or caught in any thorns, or hanging over a precipice therefore, I did not  apply the subject to myself. Certainly, I remember that my thoughts  dwelt very much on forgiveness and salvation, but I preached that  these were to be had in and by the Church, which was as the Ark in  which Noah was saved - Baptism was the door of this Ark, and Holy  Communion the token of abiding in it and all who were not inside  were lost. What would become of those outside the Church was a  matter which greatly perplexed me. I could not dare to say that they  would be lost for ever but where could they be now? and what would  become of them hereafter? I longed to save John Bunyan but he was  such a determined schismatic that is was impossible to make out a  hope for him! Sometimes I was cheered by the thought that he had  been duly baptized in infancy, and that his after-life was one of  ignorance but this opened the door too wide, and made my theory of  salvation by the Church a very vague and uncertain thing. So deeply  was the thought engrained in my mind that one day I baptized myself  conditionally in the Church, for fear that I had not been properly  baptized in infancy, and consequently should be lost hereafter. I had  no idea that I was lost now far from that, I thought I was as safe as the  Church herself, and that the gates of hell could not prevail against me.  I had many conversations with the earnest people in my parish, but  they were evidently resting, not where I was, but on something I did  not know. One very happy woman told me, ‘Ah! you went to college  to larn the Latin but though I don’t know a letter in the Book, yet I can  read my title clear to mansions in the skies.’ Another woman,  whenever I went to see her, made me read the story of her conversion,  which was written out in a copy-book. Several others, men and  women, talked to me continually about their ‘conversion’. I often  wondered what that was but, as I did not see much self-denial among  these converted ones, and observed that they did not attend God’s  House nor ever come to the Lord’s table, I thought conversion could  not be of much consequence, or anything to be desired. 

I little knew that I was the cause of their remaining away from church, and from the Lord’s table. One thoughtful man told me, ‘Cornish  people are too enlightened to go to church! A man must give up  religion to go there only unconverted people and backsliders go to  such a place!’ Yet this was a prayerful man. What did he mean? At  various clerical meetings I used to repeat these things, but still  obtained no information or satisfaction. 

I made it a rule to visit every house in my parish once a week, taking from twelve to twenty each day, when I sought to enlighten the people  by leaving Church tracts, and even wrote some myself but they would  not do. I found that the Religious Tract Society’s publications were  more acceptable. To my great disappointment, I discovered too, that  Evangelical sermons drew the people, while sacramental topics did not  interest them. So, in my ardent desire to reach and do them good, I  procured several volumes of Evangelical sermons, and copied them,  putting in sometimes a negative to their statements, to make them, as I  thought, right. 

Now I began to see and feel that there was some good in preaching, and used the pulpit intentionally, in order to communicate with my  people, carefully writing or compiling my sermons. But I must confess  that I was very nervous in my delivery, and frequently lost my place -  sometimes even myself and this to the great confusion of the  congregation. 

I will tell how it pleased the Lord to deliver me from this bondage of nervousness, and enable me to open my lips so as to plainly speak out  my meaning. 

One day, a friend with whom I was staying was very late in coming down to breakfast so, while I was waiting, I employed myself in  reading the ‘Life of Bishop Shirley’, of Sodor and Man. My eyes  happened to fall on a passage, describing a difficulty into which he fell  by losing his sermon on his way to a country church. When the prayers  were over, and the psalm was nearly sung, he put his hand into his  pocket for his manuscript, and, to his dismay, it was gone. There was  no time to continue his search so he gave out a text, and preached, as  he said, in dependence upon God, and never wrote a sermon  afterwards. 

When my friend came to breakfast, he asked me what I had been doing all the morning. I told him. ‘Ah!’ he said, quietly, ‘why do you not  preach in dependence upon God, and go without a book like that good  man?’ ‘I preach like that!?’ I said, in amazement, terrified at the very  thought. ‘Yes,’ he answered, mischievously, ‘you. Who needs to  depend upon God for this more than you do?’ Seeing that I was  perturbed at his suggestion, he went on teasing me all breakfast time,  and at last said, ‘Well, what is your decision? Do you mean to preach  in future in dependence upon God?’ I said, ‘Yes I have made up my  mind to begin next Sunday’ Now it was his turn to be terrified, and he  did all he could to dissuade me, saying, ‘You will make a fool of  yourself!’ ‘No fear of that,’ I replied ‘I do it already I cannot be worse.  No I will begin next Sunday!’ 

I came back with the determination to keep my promise, but must confess that I grew more and more uneasy as the time approached.  However, on Sunday, I went up into the pulpit, and spoke as well as I  could, without any notes, and found it far easier than I had feared. In  the evening it was still easier and so I continued, week by week,  gaining more confidence, and have never written a sermon since that  day - that is, to preach it. Once I was tempted to take a book up into  the pulpit, feeling I had nothing to say, when something said to me, ‘Is  that the way you depend upon God?’ Immediately I put the volume on  the floor, and standing on it, gave out my text, and preached without  hesitation. This going forward in dependence upon God has been a  deliverance to me from many a difficulty besides this one, and that  through many years. 

One day I went, in my cassock and cap, to the shop of a man whom I regarded as a dreadful schismatic. He sold the publications of the  Religious Tract Society. On entering, he appeared greatly pleased to  see me, and took unusual interest and pains in selecting tracts, giving  me a double portion for my money. His kindness was very  embarrassing and when, on leaving, he followed me to the door and  said ‘God bless you!’ it gave me a great turn. A schismatic blessing a  priest! This, indeed, was an anomaly. I was ashamed to be seen coming  out of the shop, and the more so, because I had this large Evangelical  parcel in my hand, I felt as though everybody was looking at me.  However, the tracts were very acceptable at home, and in the parish. I  even began to think there was something good in them. So I sent for  more. 

Three men, one after another, told me that they had been converted through reading them. One of these said that ‘the tract I had given him  ought to be written in letters of gold’ and a few months after, this same  man died most happily, rejoicing in the Lord, and leaving a bright  testimony behind. I mentioned the conversion of these three men to  many of my friends, and asked them for some explanation, but got  none. Still, the thought continually haunted me - What can this  ‘conversion’ be? 

I had made it a custom to pray about what I had to do, and anything I could not understand therefore I prayed about this. Just then (I believe,  in answer to prayer) a friend offered to lend me Southey’s ‘Life of  Wesley’, and said, ‘You will find it all about conversion’ and a few  days after came a tract, John Berridge’s ‘Great Error Detected.’ This  tract was carefully marked with pencil, and had several questions  written in the margin. I found out that it came from a person to whom  I had given it and who was anxious to know its meaning. 

I read it with much interest, for I saw that the first portion of the history of Berridge corresponded with mine but as I went on reading, I  wondered what he could mean by ‘Justification’. What was that  wonderful thing which God did for him and for the souls of his  people? What could he mean by having his eyes opened to see himself  a wretched, lost man? What was ‘seeing the way of salvation’? He said  that he had preached for six years, and never brought a single soul to  Christ, and for two years more in another place, and had no success  but now, when he preached Christ instead of the Church, people came  from all parts, far and near, to hear the sound of the glorious Gospel  and believers were added to the Church continually. I grappled with  this subject but I could not, by searching, find out anything, for I was  in the dark, and knew not as yet that I was blind, and needed the  power of the Holy Spirit to awaken and bring me to see myself a lost  sinner. My soul was now all astir on this subject but, as far as I can  remember, I wanted the information - not for myself but because I  thought I should then get hold of the secret by which the Wesleyans  and others caught and kept their people, or rather my people.  Soon after, my gardener, a good Churchman, and duly despised by his  neighbours for attaching himself to me and my teaching, fell seriously  ill. I sent him at once to the doctor, who pronounced him to be in a,  miner’s consumption, and gave no hope of his recovery. No sooner did  he realize his position, and see eternity before him, than all the Church  teaching I had given him failed to console or satisfy, and his heart sank  within him at the near prospect of death. In his distress of mind, he did  not send for me to come and pray with him, but actually sent for a  converted, man, who lived in the next row of cottages. This man,  instead of building him up as I had done, went to work in the opposite  direction - to break him down that was, to show my servant that he  was a lost sinner, and needed to come to Jesus just as he was, for  pardon and salvation. He was brought under deep conviction of sin,  and eventually found peace through the precious blood of Jesus.  Immediately it spread all over the parish that ‘the parson’s servant was  converted’. The news soon reached me, but, instead of giving joy,  brought the most bitter disappointment and sorrow to my heart. Such  was the profound ignorance I was in! 

The poor man sent for me several times, but I could not make up my mind to go near him. I felt far too much hurt to think that after all I had  taught him against schism, he should fall into so great an error.  However, he sent again and again, till at last his entreaties prevailed,  and I went. Instead of lying on his bed, a dying man, as I expected to  find him, he was walking about the room in a most joyful and ecstatic  state. ‘Oh, dear master!’ he exclaimed, ‘I am glad you are come! I am so  happy! My soul is saved, glory be to God!’ ‘Come, John,’ I said, ‘sit  down and be quiet, and I will have a talk with you, and tell you what I  think.’ But John knew my thoughts quite well enough, so he burst out,  ‘Oh, master! I am sure you do not know about this, or you would have  told me. I am quite sure you love me, and I love you - that I do! but,  dear master, you do not know this - I am praying for the Lord to show  it to you. I mean to pray till I die, and after that if I can, till you are  converted.’ He looked at me so lovingly, and seemed so truly happy,  that it was more than I could stand. Almost involuntarily, I made for  the door, and escaped before he could stop me. 

I went home greatly disturbed in my mind - altogether disappointed and disgusted with my work among these Cornish people. ‘It is no use  they never will be Churchmen!’ I was as hopeless and miserable as I  could be. I felt that my superior teaching and practice had failed, and  that the inferior and, as I believed, unscriptural dogmas had prevailed.  My favourite and most promising Churchman had fallen, and was  happy in his fall more than that, he was actually praying that I might  fall too! 

I was very jealous for the Church, and therefore felt deeply the conversion of my gardener. Like the elder brother of the Prodigal Son,  I was grieved, and even angry, because he was restored to favour and  joy. The remonstrance of the father prevailed nothing to mollify his  feelings in like manner, nothing seemed to give me any rest in this  crisis of my parochial work. I thought I would give up my parish and  church, and go and work in some more congenial soil or else that I  would preach a set of sermons on the subject of schism, for perhaps I  had not sufficiently taught my people the danger of this great sin!  Every parishioner I passed seemed to look at me as if he said, “So  much for your teaching! You will never convince us!” 
