## Chapter XVI.

# Opposition

### 1853

I have been telling hitherto of blessing and prosperity in the Lord’s work. Many more cases might have been mentioned, and many other things of not less moment and interest but enough has been said, I hope, to show the character of the work, and give some idea of the amount of blessing which attended it.

But it must not be supposed that the offence of the cross had ceased,―or that the enmity of the carnal mind was never stirred indeed, I always doubt the reality of a work which moves on without opposition. On the day of Pentecost when the Holy Ghost was first given, while believers were rejoicing, and sinners were pricked to the heart, and some mocked, there arose the opposition of others, who resisted the influence of the Spirit and being ‘cut to the heart’, they gnashed with their teeth, and went forward in furious contention against the Lord’s work. So it was with us.

The opposition ran very high, but I do not think it was of malice or hatred, but rather ‘righteous indignation’. The instigators of it were serious and earnest persons, who verily thought they were doing right. They tried first to save me from what they considered was my infatuation and failing that, did all they could to save others from my bad influence. ‘I bear them record, that they had a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge.’ It was just such a zeal as I had before I was converted therefore my heart’s desire was drawn out towards them, and I made continual efforts to win them.

One dear friend of old time said he felt ‘so hurt’ because I was changed, and often wondered why ‘God did not strike me dead for all the harm I had done to the Church’. Another said that he ‘should not be surprised if the very ground opened and swallowed me up for my fraternizing and schismatics. The sin of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram was nothing to mine’. At the Clerical Meeting, which I attended notwithstanding all this stir against me, I was beset on every side with something more than loving reproaches for evidently my old friends were very much grieved, and could not forgive me for what they considered the betrayal of Church principles.

A special meeting or synod of the clergy was convened by the Rural Dean, to take into consideration, among other things, my defection, and to decide what public notice should be taken on the subject of this great scandal. I also attended this meeting, and found my brethren in a very angry and excited state. One after another got up and made grievous charges against me, about the proceedings in my church and parish. The burden of their distress, however, seemed to be noise and excitement.

They said that ‘There was brawling in my church, and howling in my schoolroom, women fainting, and men shouting in a most fanatical manner. They had not witnessed these scenes themselves, but they were credibly informed of them. Moreover, they asserted, on good authority that I preached a very different doctrine to that which was authorized by the Church. I had ‘declared that there was no salvation by the Church and Sacraments, but by simple faith in Christ that any man―it did not matter what his previous life had been―if he only came to my preaching, and did as I told him, would be saved’. These, and many other such charges, were made and supported by shouts of ‘Hear! hear!’ and cries of ‘Shame!’ The Rural Dean said he was glad Mr. Haslam was present to answer for himself he had observed that I had sat very quietly to hear others, and he now hoped that a patient hearing would be given to me.

I rose, and said I was very thankful to be there, and to have this opportunity of testifying before them all that the Lord had converted my soul!

There was a little interruption here, but after a time I was permitted to go on. I said that before I was converted, I was even more zealous than any of them against this change, and greatly prejudiced against it. I actually flogged a big boy in my school for going to a chapel and professing to be converted this I did before all the children, and he promised that he would ‘never be converted any more.’ I could, therefore, well understand their present feelings, and said that I was not angry with them, but rather prayed that they might, in their turn, be enabled to see these things as I now saw them, and be saved as I was.

Upon this, there arose a great disturbance. The Rural Dean gave me credit for candour, and said he thought I meant well, but that I implied too much against my brethren however, he had said before, and would repeat it, that I had listened quietly to what others had said, and that now I was entitled to a patient hearing a little longer.

But this could not be, for I was stopped at every fresh statement I made, and had so many questions put to me, that I begged for only one at a time. I was enabled to stand my ground calmly, and endeavoured to answer the charges in order as they were brought out. To all appearance, I had to stand quite alone in that tumultuous party. We had met at twelve o’clock, and after four hours were still in the heat of the conflict.

At last, to conclude this extraordinary meeting, one of the clergy rose and said that he felt it was his painful yet necessary duty to propose that a ‘vote of censure be passed on Mr. Haslam’. It was not seconded, and so fell to the ground. Whereupon, another rose ‘to record a protest against revival meetings, as contrary to the usage of the Church.’ This also failed and as no one else had anything to say, the conclave of divines broke up. What they would have said or done, if I had not attended to be torn in pieces by them, I know not all I can say is, that they separated without eating me up. Some of them came to me afterwards, and seemed pleased that I had stood my ground so goodnaturedly, and thought that I had had a great badgering.

The opposition did not stop there―sermons were preached in several of the neighbouring churches, and people earnestly warned against attending certain services, and told not to countenance them by their presence. The newspapers also took up the matter, and public report was not behind in its usual exaggeration.

I give here an extract from a Letter I thought it necessary to write at this time, on ‘RELIGIOUS EXCITEMENT’


>‘My DEAR SIR,―I have been seriously considering, for some time, the necessity of making a public statement respecting the work of God in this place with a view partly of drawing attention to an all-important, though very neglected subject and partly with a view of giving some definite and authoritative form to the various and varied reports which are in circulation. It is vain to pretend to know nothing about them, and it is equally vain to suppose that reports about our proceedings are likely to lose less by repetition, than those on other subjects of less moment.

>‘I embrace, therefore, the opportunity which your Sermon on RELIGIOUS EXCITEMENT offers, to make a statement.

>‘I do remonstrate against your publishing to the world a sermon avowedly against “proceedings connected with a neighbouring church” and that instead of encouragement. counsel, and co-operation in what I know is the work of God, I receive this public rebuke. I make this remonstrance the more, earnestly, because several of the opinions you have expressed, are not, as I believe, consistent with the teaching of our Church and lastly, I venture to be remonstrant, because I am the person, and mine the church, which are the objects of your animadversions.

>‘You hold deservedly a high position among us in respect of rank and esteem for your piety and learning but at the hazard of incurring the imputation of arrogance, I cannot, I must not, and I will not be unfaithful to the light in which I walk, by the grace of God and therefore I do simply and plainly protest, in the first place, against the supposition that Excitement is a means which I am using, or an end I have in view secondly, against the supposition that conversion is a gradual work, which is to be worked out by Sacraments and Means of Grace and thirdly, against a teaching which supposes and actually declares, that a person may believe, may be pardoned, may be cleansed from sin, yet not know it.

>‘In the sense in which you censure Religious Excitement, namely, as a means to “force, as it were, the Spirit of the Lord”, and “for the purpose of strongly working on the animal feelings, etc.”, it may be justly censurable. Those who make excitement the end and object of their endeavours in a religious movement, must soon find the emptiness of it they throw dust into their own eyes, and will ever verify your words that “excitement lifts up for a moment and then lets fall again”, and that “like dram-drinking, it leaves those that indulge in it weaker than before.”

>‘Those who really are engaged in the work of God, and especially conversion work, must meet with “excitement”. It is impossible for a sinner, under conviction of sin, to remain in a calm imperturbable state, or when the despairing sinner comes to a knowledge of that Saviour who made Atonement for him, to help being excited with joy. Noble or peasant, gentle or uneducated, I am sure there will be excitement, and overflowing joy and gladness.

>‘A man who never felt himself a lost sinner, and never knew his need of the Saviour, may reason gravely of the impropriety of “excitement”, and the man who has never experienced the liberty of deliverance from the “horrible pit, and the mire and clay”, may seem to be wise on the subject of Christian joy but he knows it not. The outburst of joy in the new-born child of God, is as undiscriminating as the joyous mirth of children. But it becomes more subdued as the child grows on to “the conquering young-man”, and more chastened still when the “young man” attains to that state which St. John terms “father” (‘I write unto you, little children, because your sins are forgiven you for His name’s sake. I write unto you, fathers, because ye have known Him that is from the beginning. I write unto you, young men, because ye have overcome the Wicked One.’.- 1 John ii. 12, 13.). This I have no doubt is the kind of Christian joy you expect to see, and without which you are not satisfied.*   But, dear friend, remember the perfect Temple was not built in one, but three days.

>‘We are at foundation work and you rebuke us for an unfinished temple! Your rebuke is not undeserved in one sense we ought to have attained to great advancements, and to have begun long ago but God has had patience with us. In this beginning there seems to be confusion to superficial observers, but there must be “excitement” but this, as I said, is not the end in view, or the means we use. It is not long since I could reason against “excitement”, and thought as many do now, that in connection with religion it is irreverent, and unbecoming.

>‘Oh, what a snare is this unfeeling “propriety”! It is really a dislike of being aroused from sleep a fearful hugging of oneself into apathetic security, and lying down in the arms of the Wicked One for a fatal slumber. Oh that I could “excite” such persons! that I could arouse them! that by any means I could awaken these souls from the sleep of death! I would glory in the censure and rejoice in the blame. Would that I could reach your heart and the hearts of many of my other brethren that we might unite together and raise a louder call! There should be a more excited blast, as from a trumpet, to stir the masses of those who come duly and regularly “to hear us every Sunday”, a louder, stronger and more urgent and thrilling cry, Repent! Repent! We want more fearless plain speaking, more personal appeal. It is not refined to preach of the grave and death, judgment and hell,―it is “ranting” but nevertheless let us “rant” let us be faithful let us tell the sinner that he must die and that he will die in his sins and perish for ever, except he repent and be converted that his sins may be blotted out. Let us tell him that he “is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the Name of the only-begotten Son of God” (John iii. 18) that “the wrath of God abideth on him” (verse 35). Instead of arguments against “excitement”, let us have a united cry against sin and frivolity wherever it is. There is excitement against “excitement” now let there be excitement, if you will, against indifference, and neglect of religion.’

Many of the proceedings in our parish were, I confess, more tumultuous than I could justify, more noisy and exciting than I thought needful but I could not control the people. If they had been educated to ideas of propriety and self-control, the impulse of Divine power, which really then filled them, might have found expression in a more quiet and orderly manner. To hinder their rejoicings therefore, though they were considered so obnoxious, would have been to withstand the Spirit of God. As the people had not been taught better, I could not interfere with them I would rather bear the obloquy of men.

For instance, one day, by way of change, I had a meeting for the Bible Society, and invited some of the clergy who sympathized with its object. They attended, and others came out of curiosity ‘to see these revival people.’  We had a large gathering, and everything began smoothly. My Scripture-reader, who was naturally a most excitable and noisy man, tried to do his best before the clergy he spoke of the sweet words which they had heard from the reverend speakers it was charming, he said, to hear of a good cause supported in such ‘mellifluous accents’, and so forth. He got a little wild towards the end, but on the whole he was to be praised for his kind efforts to give a quiet tone to the meeting. By this time, our friend ‘Billy Bray’ had appeared on the scene, and gave us chapter and verse from one end of the Bible to the other, on the subject of ‘dancing for joy’. He propounded his theory, that if a man did not praise God, he would not rise in the resurrection if he only praised God with his mouth, he would rise like those things carved on the tombstones, with swelling cheeks and wings if he clapped his hands (suiting his actions to the words) he would have a pair of hands as well as the resurrection and if he danced with his feet, he would rise complete. He hoped to rise like that, to sing, to clap his hands, dance, and jump too. The worst of jumping in this world, he said, was that he had to come down again, but in heaven he supposed the higher he danced and jumped, the higher he would be walking in heaven, to his mind, was praising God, one foot said ‘Glory’, and the other ‘Hallelujah’.

Under ‘Billy’s’ original theories the people were warming up, and becoming a little responsive, and ‘Billy’ himself was getting excited. In reference to some remarks which had been made by a previous speaker about Samson, he said that he felt as happy and strong as Samson then suddenly he put his arms round me, as I was standing gesticulating and making signs to the people to be still, and taking me up as he had done once before, he carried me down the schoolroom, crying out, ‘Here go the posts! Glory! hallelujah!’ It was useless to resist, for he held me with an iron grasp so I remained still, hoping at every step that he would put me down. I suppose he imagined himself to be Samson carrying off the gates of Gaza. The people got what they called ‘happy’, and shouted and praised God most vociferously. I gave out a hymn, but the joy of the Cornish people could not be restrained within the bounds of a tune, or form of words. Some of them became very excited and unmanageable only those who have witnessed such scenes can understand what I mean. The power of God was great, though the demonstrations were very human. My visitors trembled with fear, and made their escape as precipitately as they possibly could. To those who are not in the power of the Spirit such rejoicings are unintelligible lookers-on are stumbled or offended because they only see and feel the human manifestation, and not the Divine power they are like people who get all the smoke, and none of the warmth of the fire.

I made up my mind for the worst, for we had a reporter there, and some others who were only too ready to make the most of such a scene. Nevertheless I would rather have the same thing over and over again, than have the most stately and orderly ceremonials conjoined with spiritual death. These things, with all their proprieties, are very chilling to living souls, and all the more hurtful because dead souls are satisfied by them instead of being disturbed.

Dear Mr. Aitken was very angry with us, when he heard the things which were reported and, like a good spiritual father, he came over to teach us better. He preached one of his own strong sermons, on the difference between emotion and principle, and after beating us down very hard, his dear heart relented, and he tried to cheer and lift us up. This last is always an easy thing to do in Cornwall. The people soon responded to his efforts, and began to praise God and then he took fire, and praised too. Mutually exciting and being excited, his powerful voice could be heard above the din of hundreds of shouting voices. The dear man was happy in his soul, and so was I, and we did not care a halfpenny for the outside world, newspapers, or anything else.

We had obloquy with opposition and even to my personal friends I could not give satisfactory explanations of these things. One suggested that I should read a paper at the next Clerical Meeting, and give a statement in exposition of my views and practices. This I consented to do, and Mr. Aitken kindly helped me to write it. On the appointed day I undertook to read it, on condition that no one interrupted me till I had finished. It was a hard task for them to sit still, but they did manage to do so and at the end, burst out upon me in a volley of censure and disapprobation. I was obliged to tell them that they were not converted, and therefore could not understand these things.

I wrote a pamphlet to show that the Church of England’s teaching was based on CONVERSION, and not on baptism and that the Reformation was to the Church of England what Conversion was to the individual reformers. Taking my own change as an illustration, I said, that I used to rest on Baptism and the Church, and that now I was standing on the Rock, Christ Jesus. Once I worked for life, and now I worked from life that is, because I possessed it. I declared that this was the characteristic difference between the Church of England as it is, and as it was when connected with the Church of Rome. This pamphlet would not satisfy them. I then wrote and published a letter to the Archdeacon, in which, in my young zeal, I charged the clergy with being unconverted, and doing the devil’s work in hindering the salvation of souls, and that they seemed to stand on their parish boundaries and say, ‘This is my parish, and you shall not come here to disturb the sleep of death which now reigns.’ This poured no oil upon the waters.

I then wrote another pamphlet upon which I spent much time, thought, and prayer. I took the manuscript and read it to Mr. Aitken. He walked up and down in his large room, while I was reading, and ejaculated, as only he could, ‘Bless God! Glory be to God!’ When I finished, I said, ‘Shall I print it?’

He said, ‘It is worth printing, but it will do no good. It is like a little doggie barking at a dead elephant. We shall never convert the Church as a body we must try and get at individuals. I am quite convinced we shall not succeed unless we work in this way.’