## Chapter XXIV.

# Sanctification

When I returned from the far-off mission in Staffordshire, whether from over-fatigue or other causes, I was much depressed in mind as well as body, and quite out of heart with the Church of England. It is true I found the converted people in Staffordshire were not so leavened with Dissent as in Cornwall, and that there was some attachment to the Church but still I could see that Churchmen there, as elsewhere, distrusted spirituality, and preferred to work on their own ecclesiastical or sacramental lines they chose to draw water to quench their thirst, rather than to ask, and receive (directly from Christ) the living water.

If a bishop accidentally invited me, or if a clergyman cordially did so, they were marked exceptions. I felt myself to be obnoxious to the majority of my clerical brethren who professed to represent the Church but, somehow, I was convinced that, as a converted clergyman, I represented the Church of England more truly than they, and that the principles of the Reformation were the principles I was working upon. This was trial from outside, which, however trying to flesh and blood, is by no means so bad as misgiving from within.

I was discouraged also about the work in which I had been engaged for there was evidently an imperfection about it. I observed that some people over whom I rejoiced as converted, went back to their former worldliness, which perplexed and troubled me more than I can describe. I knew from my own experience, that CONVERSION was necessary to salvation and a new life but when people professed to be saved, and did not live a new life, I was sure there was something wrong. My dear friend, Mr. Aitken, said, ‘My brother, this work is the Lord’s you must go to Him and ask what is wrong. Lie on your face before Him, till He shows you His will about the matter!’

This I did for, shutting myself up in the church, I cried to the Lord till I felt that an answer would come in due time.

Soon after, I was led to preach from the text, ‘Through this Man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins and by Him all that believe are justified from all things” (Acts xiii. 38, 39). This opened my eyes to see that the proclamation was twofold that through Christ Jesus, pardon was offered to any and every sinner as such, and moreover, that by the same Christ Jesus, every believer - that is, every one who had received the forgiveness of his sins -was justified from all things. Those who know how old familiar texts flash upon the mind with new meaning, will understand my surprise. God was speaking to me in answer to my inquiry. I had been preaching forgiveness and salvation through the blood-shedding and death of Christ and confining myself to this, as if salvation were all. I now saw that I had not preached about Justification to believers, as fully as I had dwelt on the subject of pardon to sinners indeed, that I had preached to believers the same Gospel which I preached to them before they were converted that is, that Christ died for their sins, but not the ‘yea rather, that is risen again’. No wonder they did not stand, if their standing-place before God their Father was not simply and plainly put before them. Believers having been brought from death unto life, from the cross to the resurrection-side of Christ’s grave, should be led to the Throne of Grace, where Christ sits at the right hand of God, making intercession for them. Once enlightened on the subject, it was easy to see that this truth was set forth all through the Bible.

For instance, when the prodigal son received pardon, immediately his father called the servants and said unto them, ‘Bring forth the best robe and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand and shoes -on his feet.’ Here, besides pardon, is standing - union - strength and over and beyond these, the feast of rejoicing.

When the children of Israel were brought out of Egypt, it was not that they should escape from bondage only, but that they should be led, and even carried, by God through the wilderness. Moses illustrated this in a simple yet comprehensive figure, when he wrote, ‘As an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings so the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange god with him’ (Deut. xxxii, 11, 12). The thousands who perished in the wilderness were persons of whom it may be said that they professed to come up out of Egypt, and did so in act but God, who looks upon the heart, saw that they were still lingering in that place for when they were in trouble, they said, ‘Would God that we had died in the land of Egypt! or would God we had died in this wilderness! .. . Let us make a captain, and let us return into Egypt’ (Num. xiv. 2-4).

This is one secret of the ‘going back’ which I have noticed. People came out as converted, whose hearts were still entangled in the things of this world, or in some besetments with which they were fettered. Those who are really converted should come out, as Caleb and Joshua did. They left Egypt behind them altogether, and finally, in their trials and troubles in the wilderness, they looked for deliverance, not in going back, but in going forward, assured that if lions were before, there were dragons behind.

Another lesson which we may learn from these two, is, that they compared difficulties and giants, not with themselves, but with the Lord. It was true that they were not able to conquer their enemies or take their cities, but, as they said, ‘the Lord is able to give us the victory.’ In this I saw how Joshua trusted God, also how God wrought a great deliverance.

I urged the people to consider that we were not created and redeemed to be saved, but saved to glorify God in our lives but I grieve to say, this teaching did not meet with the acceptance I hoped for. I wondered at their slowness of heart to believe in the ‘risen’ Christ, and was sure that this was reason enough for their instability and I felt that there would be nothing else while they continued to receive only a part of the Gospel instead of the whole.

One thing leads to another. While I was thus making discoveries, my attention was drawn to a hymn, which spoke of ‘Jordan’s stream’, and ‘death’s cold flood’, as if they were the same thing. Now, I had always regarded Jordan as death but the question in my mind was - What is all that fighting and conquering in the land of Canaan, if Canaan represents heaven? I observed, moreover, that the Israelites were on the defensive in the wilderness, and on the aggressive on the other side of Jordan that they were led by the cloud on the one, and by a living Person on the other that they were daily sustained with manna, as children, on the one side, and ate the old corn of the land, as men of Israel, on the other, besides sowing and reaping for themselves. These striking marks of contrast excited much inquiry, and not obtaining, with sufficient definiteness, the satisfaction I sought, I went to the Lord about this, as before. I confessed my shortcomings, and the defectiveness of my teaching, and pleaded earnestly, ‘Lord, what wouldst Thou have me to do? What I know not, teach Thou me!’

Then I was brought into the deepest distress and perplexity of soul, to think that after my experience of conversion, and all I had done for the conversion of others. I was still such a vile, self-condemned sinner. I even began to think that I had never been converted it appeared to me that my whole life was nothing but intense selfishness that I availed myself of the blood of Christ for my salvation and happiness, and led others to do the same, rejoicing with them in thus making use of God for the purpose of getting quit of hell and gaining heaven. It was a clear case of making God serve me, instead of my serving Him. Many other things came to my mind, by which I knew there was an immense gap between my experience and the Word of God. I can see it all now but at the time it was very dark and grievous.

When I had been under conviction before, at the time of my conversion, it was, as it were, with my eyes shut but now they were open then I saw my sins, and the penalty which was due to them now I saw my unrighteousness, and the corruption of my nature. I felt as if I were two persons, and that there was a law in my members warring against the law of my mind, the flesh contending against the Spirit. ‘O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?’ For a whole week I was in great distress of mind, especially during the last three days.

On Sunday morning as I was going to the early Communion, my soul was set at liberty. I felt as if a great cloud was lifted up the light shone into my soul and I had deliverance. I was exceedingly happy in the knowledge that the risen Christ Himself was my help - that He, who had hidden His presence in a pillar of cloud and fire, now was Himself present in Person, my omnipotent Friend and Leader!

This was quite a new experience, and one I had not known before. I thought that I had not even heard or read of it, and therefore began to suspect whether it was a temptation. I determined to be wise, and not commit myself too soon, so made up my mind that I would not refer to it in the pulpit. But at the close of the service a stranger came into the vestry to thank me for my sermon and when we were alone he put the question to me, ‘How long have you known Sanctification?’

>I replied, ‘Do I know it now?’

>‘Yes,’ he said, ‘you preached it experimentally this morning and I shall be very much surprised if you have not some inquiries on the subject before the day is out.’

I felt reproved before this stranger’s steady gaze, and confessed that I had received the blessing that very morning but thinking that it might be a temptation, I had determined to say nothing about it.

He said, ‘That was a temptation from the devil, sure enough, to hinder you for the Lord spoke on this subject through your sermon as clearly as ever I have heard. Do not be afraid, but go on and tell others.’

So in the evening I preached on Sanctification, and we had an aftermeeting in the schoolroom. Many believers stayed behind to ask questions upon the subject of my sermon. I do not remember how I replied to them but imperfect as my statements must have been, it nevertheless led others to desire to enter into the experience of this same blessing.

The following morning, I happened to take up a tract by John Fletcher, of Madeley, in which I read, that at a breakfast party on the occasion of a wedding, to which he was invited, just in the middle of idle and frivolous conversation which was going on, he was constrained to rise up and say, ‘I have three times had an experience of joy and liberty, which I believe to be Sanctification, and it has passed away now that it has returned again, I take this opportunity to testify.’ The company were all struck with amazement the power of God was present and the festive gathering was turned into a meeting for prayer and praise. I took warning from this tract never to withhold my testimony on this subject.

Soon after this, I was holding an afternoon Bible class in another part of the parish we were going through St. Luke’s gospel, and had come to the fifth chapter I said with reference to the miraculous draught of fishes, that the fish had been swimming about in their native element in all quietness and freedom, till they came in contact with a net, and it came in contact with them. Observe, I said, three things 

1. They are caught in the net. 
2. They are drawn out of their native element. 
3. They are laid in the boat, at the feet of Christ. 

So it is, where people are caught in the Gospel net - this is conviction they are drawn out of the state in which they were - this is conversion but they are not yet in the state in which they should be, this is why it is so hard to hold them they ought to be drawn to Christ Himself, for this is the ultimate object of catching souls the one thing needful is to be brought to the feet of Christ.

I intentionally abstained from using the word ‘Sanctification’, though I was endeavouring to typify the experience of it, and to contrast it with conversion. As I went on speaking, a woman in the small assembly put up her hands and began to shout and praise God, ‘This is Sanctification!’ she cried ‘I have it! I know it! Praise the Lord!’ There was a great stir in the class some cried, and some asked questions. One woman, who was more advanced in general knowledge and experience than most of the others, declared, that she did not believe in Sanctification, for she had known so many who professed to have it, and lost it. ‘Lost what?’ I said, ‘you cannot lose an experience the joy of it may depart, and certainly does where people rest on their feelings instead of the fact, on the effect,. instead of the cause.’ She confused the sanctification of the believer, with the effect it produced on him. The Spirit which works sanctification in our souls, can keep us in it, if we continue to look to Him, instead of looking at His work. I said to her, what I have said ever since to all who are inclined to argue on the subject Believers too often dispute about Sanctification, in the same manner as the unconverted do on the subject of Justification. It is not worth while for those who know to contend with those who only think. I told her to go home and pray about it, and ask the Lord if He had anything more to give, to let her have it.

She was sullen, and hard to persuade but after a little more conversation and prayer, she consented to lay aside her prejudice and do as I had told her. She did so, and came again the next morning to see me. Fortunately, I was not in my house, but shut up, as my custom was, in the church for meditation and prayer. She followed me thither, but being engaged with my Master, I answered no knocks or taps, whether at the doors or windows even on this occasion I did not respond, although I heard some one walking round and round the church, and knocking impatiently for admittance. When I came out. I heard that Hannah had called, and wished very much to see me for she wanted (to use her own expression) ‘to hug the dear head of him, if she could catch him’. She was happy beyond expression, for she had had a dream and what is more she said that she had entered into the ‘second blessing’.

In her dream she saw a well of water as clear as crystal it was beautiful, and the clean pebbles at the bottom quite glistened with brightness, so that she could count them. ‘There, there,’ she said, ‘What does any one want clearer and cleaner than that?’ As she looked into this clear well, my voice said to her, ‘Throw a pebble into it,’ when she did so in an instant the water became thick and dirty. ‘Ah,’ said my voice again, ‘The water of grace is always clear as crystal, but the well in which it is - that is your heart - is most’ unclean. The Lord can give you a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within you’ (Ps. li. 10). She woke up from her sleep, and immediately began to pray, asking the Lord for a clean heart, until she obtained it.

Some may say, ‘But what did she obtain?’ This question is seldom if ever asked by persons who know the experience of this blessing but to those who do not, it is very difficult to convey an idea of what it is by definitions. Let it be enough to understand that there is something desirable to be had, which may be obtained by doing as this woman did. ‘As in water face answereth to face, so the heart of man to man’ (Prov. xxvii. 19). Those who know it, understand one another and rejoice together. There is no such mutual sympathy and joy as that which brethren have who are partakers of this higher blessing. After this, Hannah became a restful, peaceful soul and many others, with her, found that quiet confidence which can only belong to those who can and do trust a risen and living Christ.

It was quite a new era in the work, and called out fresh energies but like every new thing, it absorbed too much attention, to the exclusion of the simple Gospel for the unsaved. ‘Christ died for our sins,’ is only part of the Gospel, though a very important part. ‘Christ rose again the third day according to the Scriptures’ (1 Cor. xv. 3,4), is also a part, which should not be omitted in its due time and place. These two important truths, I am sure, are needful for scriptural work, and they should both be systematically preached.
